# Covid19TimeSeries

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has spread swiftly across the world, with nearly 500,000,000 confirmed cases as of April, 2022 (?). Its mutations are a great concern as they are rather unpredictable and can express varying symptoms. Two noted mutations of interest that were identified in early 2021 are Theta (P.3) and Alpha (E484k). Theta (P.3) was first identified in the Philippines but has since spread across many countries (?), as has Alpha (E484k), which was first identified in South Africa (?). As more mutations begin to cause global concern, it may be worthwhile to attempt the predicting of  mutations based on symptoms that people are experiencing. This paper tests five multivariate anomaly detection algorithms (Local Outlier Factor, Principal Component Analysis, Vector Autoregression, Univariate Long short-term memory (LSTM), and LSTM Autoencoders) in an effort to predict mutations Theta (P.3) and Alpha (E484k), using hourly data from November 2020 - January 2021 that express eleven different symptoms related to SARS-CoV-2. We also propose a new method, using a stacked LSTM architecture in univariate fashion to better predict the outset of a mutation before it causes harm.

The algorithm that we have created seeks to improve the existing LSTM Autoencoders algorithm and enhance the results. This enhancement was created because the LSTM Autoencoders model that we ran on our symptom dataset was the strongest for mutation prediction and thus, we desired to build from it. The first improvement is to use linear transformations of the data via a principal components analysis transformation. This will allow the algorithm to deal with less features and provide a more accurate prediction of the real data. Our particular dataset contained eleven features and we were able to reduce that number down to eight for the enhanced model we ran. Next, while the LSTM Autoencoders method always uses one previous time point to predict the next, we have created a method to use multiple previous time points. This involves the creation of a multivariate sliding window dataset built off one variable sliding window datasets (one for each symptom resolution) and the testing of many time points on the training dataset to find the ideal number. With the optimal number of timesteps and principal component data, the LSTM Autoencoders method of anomaly detection is stronger and more robust. This algorithm was evaluated against the five existing methods by examining the total anomalies, anomalies per week, and anomalies in the first half of January 2021 to ensure that there was significant improvement in COVID-19 mutation prediction.
